Creating Tables


Normalized Design


In a normalized database, the relationships among the tables match the relationships that are really there 
among the data.


Rules for Normalized Designs

1) Every row has the same number of columns (columns can be empty or zero)

2) There is a unique key, and everything in a row says something about the key. Sometimes the key is more than one 
column, or even all of them.

Example 

student_id      major

3423423         CS 
4545455         CS
3423423         Humanities

Everything in a row other than the key, says something about the key.

3) The non-key columns describe the key; they don't describe other non-key columns. For example, if in a customers table,
we have a 'spouse' column, and a 'spouse contact info' column, it would make sense for the spouse contact info to 
be in a seperate table.

4) Tables shouldn't imply relationships that don't exist.

Example - Table of Employees

Name        Technology      Language

Annabel     Databases       English
Annabel     Linux           French

Annabel knows Linux AND French, not Linux in French - as the last emtry may imply. It doesn't make sense that 
Databases and English would be an entry, and Linux and French would be another.

In this case, it would be better to create a tech_skills table with name and technology comulmns,
and a language_skills table, with name and language columns.


Table Design

Say we need to construct a table of animals, and the kinds of foods they eat.

There are several different ways to structure this database to support multiple foods for the same species.

We could have a 'species' column, and a 'food 1', 'food 2', 'food 3' etc column for each food that a species eats.

We could have a 'species' column, and a 'foods' column, which contains a list of foods which each species eats.

Or, we could simply have a 'species' column, and a food column. If a species eats different foods, we would simply
make different rows for each food.

Example:

Llama   fruits
Llama   vegetables

This method is superior since it works better with joins and comparisons, and doesn't require knowledge of how many different kinds of foods
each animal eats in advance.

This is an example of a normalized design.


Avoiding Duplication

We can split the information from one object oriented record into seperate tables.

For example, consider a design for a database which stores customer data.

Each customer has a name, an age, and phone numbers. They could any combinations of work phones, home phones,
emergency phones, mobile phones, etc.

Rather than storing all data in the same table, it makes sense to split out the phone number data into it's own 
table.

The id, name, and age of the customers can be stored in one table.

The id, phone number type, and phone numbers can be stored in another table. Multiple entries can be stored like this:

324     home    6474546666
324     work    9893432222

This is an example of a normalized design.


Creating Tables in a Database

Creating a table involves naming the table, and defining the columns.

Columns are given a name, type, and optionally, constraints. Types can be given row constraints.

create table <table-name> (
    column1 type [constraints]
    column2 type [constraints]
);

Types vary depending on the database service. For example, PostgreSQL has types for:

- IP addresses

- geometric shapes

- XML

- JSON

- ranges

- arrays

- money 

and more 

** Other services, like SQLite, do not offer these types,
so it's important to research what a given service supports.

Some systems support abbreviations for long type names.

For example, in PostgreSQL,

timestampz = timestamp with time zone (SQL standard type name)

Look for more in the PostgreSQL documentation.


Usually, a database and it's tables are created in advance, manually. 
Then, programs only perform inserts, updates, selects, deletes, etc.


Creating and Dropping


To create a database:

create database name[options];


To drop a database (opposite of create):

drop database name[options];


To drop a table:

drop table name[options];


In PostgreSQL, you can connect to database after it's been created with:

\c name 


Declaring Primary Keys

A primary key is a column or columns that uniquely identify what each row in a table is about.


Declaring s Single Column Primary Key 

create table students (
    id serial primary key,
    name text,
    birthdate date
)


Declaring a Multi-Column Primary Key 

create table postal_places (
    postal_code text,
    country text,
    name text,
    primary key (postal_code, country)
);


Declaring Relationships

By giving columns a type, we restrict the kinds of values that can later be put into them.

In some cases, columns in one table have relationships to columns in another table. Consider the employee info example,
where one table has employee IDs, names, and age, and another table has employee ID and phone number information.

It wouldn't make sense to have an employee ID in the phone numbers table that doesn't exist in the first table.

So, we have to declare that the employee ID column in table 2 has a relationship with the employee ID column in 
table 1.


Example - Name of the column is the same in both tables 

create table sales (
    sku text references products,
    sale_date date,
    count integer
);

In this case, the column in both tables is 'sku', and 'products' is the name of the second table.


Example - Name of the column is different in the second table 

create table sales (
    sku text references products (sku-number),
    sale_date date,
    count integer
);

In this case, the column in the 'sales' table is 'sku', and the name of the column in 'products' is 'sku-number'.


References provide referential integrity - columns that are supposed to refer to each other are garunteed to do so.


Foreign Keys 

A column that has a referential constraint on it is called a foreign key.

A Foreign Key is a column or set of columns in one table that uniquely identifies rows in another table.

It's possible for a table to have two or more foreign keys.

Example - referencing IDs from different tables

create table students (
    id serial primary key,
    name text
);

create table courses (
    id text primary key,
    name text
);

create table grades (
    student integer references students (id),
    course text references courses (id),
    grade text
)


Self Joins 

There are cases where you may want to join a table to itself,
eg. to find pairs of entries which have something in common.















